# EW Bard

Hello S.E. Team, I want to take some time out of my day to talk about Endwalker bard, the changes that it has recieved in Endwalker and my fears for the job moving forward.  Before I get into it though, my passion is often times mistaken for hate, please don't take it that way, I love Bard and this game, indeed, you wouldn't have to go very far to discover that I have been playing Bard in every form of content for years and have ammassed a large amount of experience playing the job.

## The good

When playing Bard in Endwalker, I want to make clear that not every change bard recieved in Endwalker was to its detrament, and so I want to list out the changes that I personally think make the job better in this section and why.

- 3 stacks of bloodletter/Rain of Death: this is a great change, both from a casual perspective and from a more hard core perspective as it allows every bard to feel like they are getting their full value out of these abilities during mages and reduces frustration when all the procs decide to trigger at the same time.  Additionally, it gives hard core players a new burst option to play around the raging strikes window with that I personally think will be fun to learn and imporve with as the Endwalker expansion continues
- Bards can recieve their own buffs!!!!  I'd think the reason I like this change should go without saying, not getting the raid buffs that you provide to others on bard felt horrible, leading to the community making no shortage of jokes and even I, myself, set my Bard's gearset name to Beethoven as a joke that Bard can play music really well, but can't hear it.
- Barrage has AOE Utility: when playing bard in dungeons, not being able to use barrage in your AOE always didn't feel right, especially when every other job that I can immediately think of could use every self buff in content with many enemies without having to do math on the fly to determine if it was really better to hit that button or hold it for later.
- Troubador is on a 90s CD: this I think might be the biggest change that every physical ranged DPS job recieved in Endwalker, but it still bears mentioning.

## The neutral

The changes I'm going to list in this section are changes that I don't think really matter to the overall playstyle of Bard and most players likely won't care about in the longer term of the job.

- 45s DoTs: While I think that the longer DoT duration will make it slightly easier for more new and casual players to pick up Bard and contribute more to a duty, I feel personally, and I expect many other veteran Bard players will agree, that this change doesn't really make a large difference to Bard in the long term, because as an experienced Bard player, I still have to plan out when I usually expect to use Iron Jaws to refresh my DoTs to maxamize the efficiency of my damage while also being able to do math quickly in my head to know when a change of plans is in order.
- Radiant Finale: I think that I joined most long time Bard players in rejoicing in radiant finale being added to the job, because it mirrors the utility provided by an ability which was removed for Shadowbringers that many of us loved: Foe's Requiem, however, many newer Bard players never new the power and fun that ability brought.

## The Bad

Changes I mention here are changes that I think will negatively impact Bard overall.

- Songs are now abilities instead of Spells: Most players likely didn't even notice this change since this really only mattered in a small number of situations, but the Bard songs being spells took away one of the more fun aspects of Bard optimization.  An example of that optimization is how Bard's rotation ended up working in the Weapons Refrain Ultimate, where due to the kill times of each primal in that fight, Bards would make sure that they had 4 stacks of Warden's Peaon before using Wanderer's Minuet for the 13s Cooldown Reduction to ensure that they could use Wanderer's Minuet at the open of Ifrit.
- The numbers of Barrage AOE Utility: while great that Bard can now comfortably use barrage for AOE, the actual damage numbers on this ability make it almost never worth while to use in that capactity, unless the tank and healer are ok with pulling every monster in a dungeon possible all at once, this is because the damage increase shadowbite sees is 100 potency, vs. the 560 potency that straightshot sees when using barrage in a normal capactiy, making it nessisary for the Bard to use it on 6 enemies before it is worth using the AOE option of the single target option.
- Shadowbite does not see a potency increase with the upgrade to quick notch at level 82: At level 82, quick notch is replaced with a new ability that's only change is an increased potency of 20 (110 -> 130), but Shadowbite remains at 170 potency (270 with barrage active).  This means the value of getting the Shadowbite ready has been reduced at level 82 relative to before.
- DOT potency reduced to a fraction of what it was:  In every expansion before Endwalker, Bard's damage over time effects have been a large part of its kit and usaged, however, in Endwalker, that was reduced relative to the rest of its kit to the point that in many cases now, it is better to not use the damage over time effects in favor of a burst show due to the large potency difference between one tick of damage over time effects vs. burst shot.
- Sidewinder:  In Endwalker, sidewinder has found itself in Bard's kit without a purpose, where it used to exist to reward bard players a bit for maintaining their damage over time abilities on a target with some extra damage, now days it is just ability bloat in the kit with the old effect removed (higher potency for each Damage over Time effect applied by the user -> raw damage)
- Mages Ballad:  as an experienced bard player, mages ballad feels wholly unrewarding now compared to expansions past with the repitore change from giving a full use of bloodletter or rain of death to now only giving half a use of these abilities.

## The Ugly

The changes i mention here are the parts of the Endwalker Bard that I think are going to make the job less desireable in the eyes of players when deciding what job to play.

- Repitore: The general job mechanic, Repitore, saw a complete rework in Endwalker compared to previous expansions, where before it was a reward for using the damage over time abilities, and scaled with multiple targets, in endwalker it has been changed to be a passive RNG based system which has no interation with the player, no way for the player to control.
- Burst: In expansion's past, bard has always been a very active job requiring quick reflexes to use correctly, but in Endwalker, this has been replaced with a much more slow playstyle that just doesn't feel good.  You get 20s of higher damage followed by 100s sitting there, waiting for raging strikes to come up again.  This is largely a problem with the change to 120s rotation, but even in the media tour build, raging strikes was on a 60s cooldown, meaning that bard was going to have more burst windows overall, which would have offset how long you have to wait in between using Wanderer's Minuet.
- 120s CD Songs: This is an insanely punishing cooldown for any job to have, if you get killed at the right time, you can be without the main damage source and utility of the job for up to 45s if you are playing the class optimally right now, and since these are now abilities instead of spells, they also punish the player more on top of that if you are slow to changing the song you are playing at the end of a previous one, whereas before there was actually a few seconds of cooldown taken off of each song just because they were spells.  To fix this one, i'd suggest making the cooldown for each song 100 or 110 seconds, or just make then spells again.
- Shadowbite: As far as changes go, the change to shadowbite may have been the most shocking as a long time bard player, and a long time FFXIV player.  Simply put, an aoe straight shot just doesn't feel good, and doens't feel like it was tested
- AoE: Dungeon AoE on Bard feels completely different from what it did in Shadowbringers, and the changes after only 3 dungeons have made me want to stop playing the job entirely.  Bard's AoE rotation used to be a set of managing damage over time effects on a few enemies while using quick notch to deal constant AoE damage and keeping rain of death on cooldown, what it has become is a quick notch simulator with a small amount of luck to use shadowbite for a 35 potency increase.

## The how did this even happen

After having played Bard for a little while in Endwalker, I was struck with a sudden realization: The entire job was different than it was even in the media tour, and to verify that I was correct in this conclusion, I navigated to the gamer escape artice, https://gamerescape.com/2021/10/13/final-fantasy-xiv-endwalker-hands-on-with-bard/, which outlined the changed to bard with screen captures of each tool tip.  Even though bard in this build could not hear its own songs, repitore still functioned as it had in previous expansions, it had a major and a minor burst window, still had multiple stacks of bloodletter/rain of death, and most of my other pain points about Endwalker bard just didn't exist.  It was so jarring infact that I was left with one permiating question: How in the world did bard get completely reworked over the course of two months to the point that it was in essence a differnet job.  I'd think that level of change would require a massive amount of QA, testing, and planning for something that just doesn't feel at all good.

## Conclusion

Endwalker Bard is the worst iteration of Bard I have played to date, that includes the Heavensward days when bard decided it wanted to try to be a caster, making me a long time fan of the job to not want to play it even in the most casual of content.
